dell_optiplex initial documentation (#139)
Dasharo/docs: docs/variants/dell_optiplex/recovery.md

# Recovery

> Following documentation describe process of recovering hardware from brick

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Following documentation describes the process of recovering hardware from brick
```

</center>

Clip on the `SPI_1` chip. Match pin 1 (`CS`) of the Pomona clip with the first
pin of `SPI_1` chip, marked with a small dot engraved on the chip.

![Clip connected](../../images/clip_connected.jpg)

## Step 4: Connect RTE

<center>
![](../../images/rte-boot.jpg)
</center>

1. Connect J2 Orange Pi Zero system debug output
2. Power the board and confirm it boots
3. **Please note** typical convention of USB-UART converter colors is as follows
    - black - GND
    - red - +5V
    - green - TX
    - white - RX
4. Connect terminal to RTE and read OS version:

    ```shell
    sudo minicom -b 115200 -D /dev/ttyUSB0 -o -C /tmp/minicom.cap
    ```

    - `-b 115200` sets baudrate
    - `-D /dev/ttyUSB0` points to USB-UART converter device, it can be
      different if you already have some devices connected or you use different
      operating system
    - `-o` skip initialization
    - `-C /tmp/minicom.cap` capture serial terminal output, if you will have
      problems with exercises please post this file
5. Login using following credentials:

    ```shell
    login: root
    password: meta-rte
    ```

## Step 5: Prepare recovery binary

* Get v0.2-rc3 binary

```bash

> wget https://cloud.3mdeb.com/index.php/s/8WNEHEFcBGFRK23/download -O dasharo_dell_optiplex_9010_v0.2-rc3.rom

Reviewer: is it a really good idea to use this binary?

Author: Do we have better idea for now?

Reviewer: I do not necessarily want people around the world to have my MAC address...

Author: @miczyg1 ok, so this is not just BIOS region?

Reviewer: No, it is not just BIOS. If it was BIOS region only, I wouldn't object to using the binary.

Reviewer: If we are using it for BIOS recovery only, I may strip it from non-BIOS regions and put a copy of the current file with different name.

Author: I'm ok with testing it during OptiPlex Tuesday

Reviewer 2: Maybe we should add event to our calendar? https://3mdeb.com/events/
I might join and discuss as well, especially if there are some deployment/automation etc considerations

Reviewer: Done.

```

* It has 12MB, so it have to be split

```bash
split -b4M dasharo_dell_optiplex_9010_v0.2-rc3.rom
```

## Step 6: Flash 4MB (BIOS) part

```bash
echo 1 > /sys/class/gpio/gpio405/value
```

```bash
echo 1 > /sys/class/gpio/gpio406/value
```

```bash
echo 1 > /sys/class/gpio/gpio404/value
```

```bash

> flashrom -w xac -p linux_spi:dev=/dev/spidev1.0,spispeed=16000 -c "MX25L3205D/MX25L3208D"

Reviewer: maybe a comment what `xac` is, I doubt everyone will understand it is the third file resulting from split

Author: Fixed https://github.com/Dasharo/docs/pull/139/commits/939d9a1569b1fe397c0f585ff79871535218aede

```

## (Optional) Step 7: Flash 8MB (ME) part

When more serious problem with occur, like
[broken ME](../faq/#cpu-was-replace-warm-reset-required-loop),
it may be necessary to use your
[firmware backup](../initial-deployment/#bios-backup)
and restore content of 8MB chip.

### Step 7a: Connect SOIC-16 Pomona clip between RTE and target

> Connect SOIC-16 Pomona according to [MX25L6406E datasheet](https://www.digikey.ch/htmldatasheets/production/980657/0/0/1/MX25L6406E.pdf).

Reviewer: It looks weird to have an over 80 chars lien with a long link, but above we break the line for shorter links

Author: Fixed https://github.com/Dasharo/docs/pull/139/commits/d10238b8d92b8faf84e499420161bf560ff88cc5

    - black - GND
    - red - +5V
    - green - TX
    - white - RX
4. Connect terminal to RTE and read OS version:

    ```shell
    sudo minicom -b 115200 -D /dev/ttyUSB0 -o -C /tmp/minicom.cap
    ```

    - `-b 115200` sets baudrate
    - `-D /dev/ttyUSB0` points to USB-UART converter device, it can be
      different if you already have some devices connected or you use different
      operating system
    - `-o` skip initialization
    - `-C /tmp/minicom.cap` capture serial terminal output, if you will have
      problems with exercises please post this file
5. Login using following credentials:

    ```shell
    login: root
    password: meta-rte
    ```

## Step 5: Prepare recovery binary

* Get v0.2-rc3 binary

```bash
wget https://cloud.3mdeb.com/index.php/s/8WNEHEFcBGFRK23/download -O dasharo_dell_optiplex_9010_v0.2-rc3.rom
```

* It has 12MB, so it have to be split

```bash
split -b4M dasharo_dell_optiplex_9010_v0.2-rc3.rom
```

## Step 6: Flash 4MB (BIOS) part

```bash
echo 1 > /sys/class/gpio/gpio405/value
```

```bash
echo 1 > /sys/class/gpio/gpio406/value
```

```bash
echo 1 > /sys/class/gpio/gpio404/value
```

> `xac` is third file resulting from previous binary split, so it contains BIOS

Reviewer: To be precise it doesn't contain the whole BIOS region. It is Dasharo code and data that fit inside this 4MB chip per fmap layout. Per Flash Descriptor the BIOS region is 6MB, which is painful to recover if something goes wrong (need to flash 2 chips).

Reviewer: Added suggestion in different comment.

> `xac` is third file resulting from previous binary split, so it contains BIOS
> region which in case of Dell OptiPlex 9010/7010 should be flashed to 4MB SPI.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`xac` is third file resulting from the previous binary split, so it contains Dasharo code and data
which fits into 4MB and in case of Dell OptiPlex 9010/7010 should be flashed to 4MB SPI.
```

</center>

<center>

 | RTE J7                                 | Pomona SOIC clip  |
 |:--------------------------------------:|:-----------------:|
 | VCC                                    | pin 2 (upside)    |
 | CS                                     | pin 7 (upside)    |
 | MISO                                   | pin 8 (upside)    |
 | SCLK                                   | pin 16 (downside) |
 | MOSI                                   | pin 15 (downside) |
 | GND                                    | pin 10 (downside) |

</center>

Numbers 1-8 have to be on one side and numbers 9-16 have to be on the other
side of the clip.

<center>
![Clip up](../../images/soic16_clip_upside.jpg)
</center>

<center>
![Clip down](../../images/soic16_clip_downside.jpg)
</center>

Clip on the `SPI_2/SPI_3` chip. Match pin 1 (`HOLD#`) of the Pomona clip with
the first pin of `SPI_2/SPI_3` chip, marked with a small dot engraved on the
chip.

![Clip connected](../../images/soic16_clip_connected.jpg)

### Step 7b: Flash 8MB (ME) part

```bash
echo 1 > /sys/class/gpio/gpio405/value
```

```bash
echo 1 > /sys/class/gpio/gpio406/value
```

```bash
echo 1 > /sys/class/gpio/gpio404/value
```

```bash

> flashrom -w optiplex_flash_8M_IFD_ME_cleaned.bin -p linux_spi:dev=/dev/spidev1.0,spispeed=16000 -c "MX25L6406E/MX25L6408E"

Reviewer: Again we must be careful, because we flash GBE region as well. This `optiplex_flash_8M_IFD_ME_cleaned.bin` has to be from a backup. We must specify the regions IFD and ME to flash and leave GBE untouched.

Author: @miczyg1 please suggest a command and I can test it. I did what was at hand at that time, and it was consulted with you on martix, but I understand we can do better.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
flashrom -w optiplex_flash_8M_IFD_ME_cleaned.bin -p linux_spi:dev=/dev/spidev1.0,spispeed=16000 -c "MX25L6406E/MX25L6408E --ifd -i fd -i me"
```

Let's try this for starters. Hopefully flashrom won't complain on layout that has addresses bigger than flash chip.

# Recovery

Following documentation describes the process of recovering hardware from brick
state with [RTE](../../../transparent-validation/rte/introduction/) and Dasharo
open-source firmware. Following procedure is supported for following models

<center>

| Vendor | Model |
:-------:|:-----:|
|Dell    | OptiPlex 7010 SFF |
|Dell    | OptiPlex 7010 DT |
|Dell    | OptiPlex 9010 SFF |

</center>

## Step 1: Prepare hardware

1. To prepare hardware please follow
[hardware preparation](../initial-deployment/#hardware-preparation) procedure.

> 2. Follow instruction in the video to remove heatsink:

Reviewer 3: Whether all points should not be declared as `1`? If the text formatting is correct, these `1` should be converted into consecutive numbers.

Author: Fixed https://github.com/Dasharo/docs/pull/139/commits/1040d116a5113f6ed8ec300850b2b1b8441499f4

![](../../images/mx25l3206e_pinout.png)
</center>

<center>
 ![Pomona SOIC clip](../../images/pomona_clip.jpg)
</center>

<center>

 | RTE J7                                 | Pomona SOIC clip  |
 |:--------------------------------------:|:-----------------:|
 | CS                                     | pin 1 (upside)    |
 | MISO                                   | pin 2 (upside)    |
 | GND                                    | pin 4 (upside)    |
 | VCC                                    | pin 5 (downside)  |
 | SCLK                                   | pin 7 (downside)  |
 | MOSI                                   | pin 8 (downside)  |

</center>

Numbers 1-4 have to be on one side and numbers 5-8 have to be on the other side
of the clip.

<center>
![Clip up](../../images/clip_upside.jpg)
</center>

<center>
![Clip down](../../images/clip_downside.jpg)
</center>

Clip on the `SPI_1` chip. Match pin 1 (`CS`) of the Pomona clip with the first
pin of `SPI_1` chip, marked with a small dot engraved on the chip.

![Clip connected](../../images/clip_connected.jpg)

## Step 4: Connect RTE

<center>
![](../../images/rte-boot.jpg)
</center>

1. Connect J2 Orange Pi Zero system debug output

> 2. Power the board and confirm it boots

Reviewer 3: Whether all points should not be declared as `1`? If the text formatting is correct, these `1` should be converted into consecutive numbers.

Author: Fixed https://github.com/Dasharo/docs/pull/139/commits/1040d116a5113f6ed8ec300850b2b1b8441499f4

</center>

<center>

 | RTE J7                                 | Pomona SOIC clip  |
 |:--------------------------------------:|:-----------------:|
 | VCC                                    | pin 2 (upside)    |
 | CS                                     | pin 7 (upside)    |
 | MISO                                   | pin 8 (upside)    |
 | SCLK                                   | pin 16 (downside) |
 | MOSI                                   | pin 15 (downside) |
 | GND                                    | pin 10 (downside) |

</center>

Numbers 1-8 have to be on one side and numbers 9-16 have to be on the other
side of the clip.

<center>
![Clip up](../../images/soic16_clip_upside.jpg)
</center>

<center>
![Clip down](../../images/soic16_clip_downside.jpg)
</center>

Clip on the `SPI_2/SPI_3` chip. Match pin 1 (`HOLD#`) of the Pomona clip with
the first pin of `SPI_2/SPI_3` chip, marked with a small dot engraved on the
chip.

![Clip connected](../../images/soic16_clip_connected.jpg)

### Step 7b: Flash 8MB (ME) part

```bash
echo 1 > /sys/class/gpio/gpio405/value
```

```bash
echo 1 > /sys/class/gpio/gpio406/value
```

```bash
echo 1 > /sys/class/gpio/gpio404/value
```

```bash

> flashrom -w optiplex_flash_8M_IFD_ME_cleaned.bin -p linux_spi:dev=/dev/spidev1.0,spispeed=16000 -c "MX25L6406E/MX25L6408E --ifd -i fd -i me"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
flashrom -w optiplex_flash_8M_IFD_ME_cleaned.bin -p linux_spi:dev=/dev/spidev1.0,spispeed=16000 -c "MX25L6406E/MX25L6408E" --ifd -i fd -i me
```

Author: Fixed in https://github.com/Dasharo/docs/pull/139/commits/7b260dfdd3b432e704b32cd3752dc6ec4ac18d51

Reviewer: Not yet. 
Change `flashrom -w optiplex_flash_8M_IFD_ME_cleaned.bin -p linux_spi:dev=/dev/spidev1.0,spispeed=16000 -c "MX25L6406E/MX25L6408E -i fd -i me --layout dell_optiplex.layout"`
To:
`flashrom -w optiplex_flash_8M_IFD_ME_cleaned.bin -p linux_spi:dev=/dev/spidev1.0,spispeed=16000 -c "MX25L6406E/MX25L6408E" -i fd -i me --layout dell_optiplex.layout`

The closing quote is in bad place

Author: Fixed https://github.com/Dasharo/docs/pull/139/commits/1b38e4f6cad5a906436d3b2e0471150e4a0552c1
